## Creating, discussing and accepting proposals

Each proposal is unique and might deviate slightly from the process below. For
example, a small addition may not require completion criteria. In general, we
encourage this process below to be followed to ensure that contributions are in
line with the goals of the Working Group.

### Proposal process

1. **Raise an Issue:**
[Create an issue](https://github.com/cn-security/safe/issues/new) in the SAFE
repo that outlines the problem to be solved. If possible, include:
  * The customer impact of the problem
  * The scope of the work required

1. **Ask the group for collaboration:** Rather than immediately beginning work
on a solution, bring the issue up for discussion at a meeting, explain it, and
ask if others are interested in collaborating. This ensures that solutions are
created with multiple perspectives. The outcome of this conversation will be:
  * The group agrees that this is a problem within the scope if the Working
  Group.
  * Criteria for completion are added to the issue that include a "definition
  of done", ideally with validation by the target audience. Also note in the
  issue if it will be a time-bounded or on-going project.
  * At least one person is tasked with creating a solution
  * Those interested in working on the solution either begin work or set up
  time or expectations with others to begin work.
  * A Technical Lead agrees to actively sponsor the work.

1. **Track progress.** As long as work is ongoing, progress should be tracked
both in the Issue or PR and in meetings.
  * Someone working on the project will attend weekly meetings to answer
  questions. In case of their absence, ensure that the Technical Lead or their
  delegate is informed about the latest changes in case questions arise.
  * It's strongly encouraged to include a checklist that shows what has been
  done and what work remains in the Issue or PR.

1. **Discuss the work at a meeting.** If an objection to a PR is made either in
a comment of the PR or during a meeting, the person making the objection and
the person making the proposal will be given time to present their view at the
next meeting. If there are not objections, or if all concerns have been
addressed, and the Pull Request has been stable for 24 hours, a Chair will add
it to the agenda for an upcoming meeting. Ideally, members who contributed to
the project will attend that meeting to present their work or answer questions.

1. **Vote, if required.** In some cases, there's consensus to accept a
proposal, and a vote is not required. If thereâ€™s not consensus among the group,
a formal vote is required. A comment will be left on the proposal prompting
members to vote and indicating the time the vote will close. Only one member
from each company should vote. Members will vote by leaving a comment in the
Pull Request to indicate their vote for or against. Members will have a week
after the vote begins to leave their vote.

1. **Accept or close the proposal.** Depending on the outcome of a discussion,
a Chair will merge or close the proposal. If a proposal is closed, the group
should create a plan to address the underlying user problem that the proposal
intended to address.

1. **Support the project going forward.** Some projects require ongoing
support. When work is completed, the body of the Pull Request should specify if
it's expected to require on-going support and if so, who will maintain it.
