# Secure Defaults: Cloud Native 8

<!-- cspell:disable -->
**Author**: Pushkar Joglekar

**Contributors** (alphabetical order): Emily Fox, Faraz Angabini,
Robert Clark, Robert Van Voorhees
<!-- cspell:enable -->

## 1. Make security a design requirement

**Rationale**: Security should be the fourth pillar in designing a cloud native
system in conjunction with consistency, availability and partition tolerance.
This approach provides cost-savings in time and effort when compared to moving a
system from an insecure state to secure state as an afterthought. This approach
is known as _secure by design_.

**How:** Utilize threat modeling, red/purple/blue team reports of prototypes and
existing systems, as well as amplified feedback loops to generate design
requirements to mitigate potential attacks. These should be integrated in the
form of corresponding tests into the existing software development process and
pipeline.

**Example**: Docker runtime ships with built-in seccomp policy, blocks unneeded
linux capabilities and runs on a local unix socket by default which reduces the
attack surface area at kernel and network layer.

## 2. Applying secure configuration has the best user experience

**Rationale**: Secure defaults should be part of the initial configuration in
setup and are transparent to the operator. It must be the easiest option to get
things done and not degrade system behavior significantly.

**How:** Review the existing end user facing guides and APIs to determine where
the security configurations exist and ask users of the project these questions:
Are the instructions clear? Is the API documentation explicit? Does it require
the reader or user to be an expert or make guesses? Does it increase the
cognitive load of the reader or user to apply successfully? If applying secure
configuration takes the same or longer than the traditional setup, documentation
is missing, or is difficult to follow, revisit the configuration to reduce time
by 20% with each version release eventually making it part of project setup and
installation.

**Example**: Running Kubernetes with Mutual TLS enabled for communication
between control plane components, has the best user experience because of
built-in certificate management capability.

## 3. Selecting insecure configuration is a conscious decision

**Rationale**: Sometimes, insecure configuration is applied to drive business
outcomes with increased risk. In that case, this selection should be easy to
understand and would need explicit choice from the user of the system to both
understand the risk and consciously accept it.

**How:** Alert the operator when running in an insecure mode and ensure
accompanying documentation clearly captures those. List security implications of
insecure configurations with links to the preferred secure configuration
guidance.

**Example**: Running a pod as _privileged_ in Kubernetes, needs an explicit
addition of privileged: true in the security context of a pod specification thus
making the user choose to run a pod as privileged.

## 4. Transition from insecure to secure state is possible

**Rationale**: When security is not considered as a design requirement and the
project gains wider adoption, moving to more secure defaults may get traction
and attention of the maintainers. Suddenly switching to secure defaults can lead
to backwards compatibility issues. Such a move, if gradual, simple and
reversible can give users confidence to move to these secure defaults.

**How:** Engage with end users after each release to learn about their
experience in adopting and embracing secure defaults. Dedicate engineering time
each sprint to reduce any difficulty end users experience through streamlining
or automating the configurations in upgrades and migrations — the goal is to
balance backwards compatibility, user experience, and new feature development.

**Example**: Seccomp Filter support in Kubernetes with feature gates and ability
to audit for syscall failures gives users a way to transition to this secure
default one cluster at a time. In an event this transition fails, it is possible
to revert the cluster and namespace to an earlier default state.

## 5. Secure defaults are inherited

**Rationale**: Secure defaults of an underlying system can be inherited by a
system that runs on top of that system. This allows higher level abstractions
with loosely coupled systems that saves redundant efforts across the different
layers.

**How:** Provide a shared responsibility model focused on secure defaults the
underlying system can provide with links to guidance, instruction, and settings
to ensure that they may be inherited as part of defense in depth. Inherited
control should document where hybrid controls become the responsibility of the
consumer.

**Example**: Using TLS protocol for inter-service communication, allows systems
that utilize TLS to inherit the security properties of TLS protocol and its
implementation without worrying about secure key exchange, in-transit data
protection and two party authentication.

## 6. Exception lists have first class support

**Rationale**: Secure defaults can be too restrictive for certain workflows. In
those cases, exceptions should be allowed, logged and tracked by a policy
engine. Proper implementation of exception lists should result in only those
privileges being granted that are needed.

**How:** Exceptions lists are treated as an essential feature and considered as
part of the security design of the software. When working on the design
requirements, establish a user story for exception lists with equal
consideration to other requirements.

**Example**: Policy enforcement admission controllers like Pod Security
Admission (PSP replacement) have built-in support to add a list of namespaces
where the pod security policies are not enforced to allow running privileged
workloads in those namespaces.

## 7. Secure defaults protect against pervasive vulnerability exploits

**Rationale**: Secure defaults should create value for the user of a system by
protecting them from pervasive and common vulnerability exploits that have an
insecure precondition for a successful exploit.

**How**: As part of the pipeline, integrate tooling and code reviews that
identify the following common opportunities: remote code execution (RCE),
arbitrary code execution, arbitrary file read, path traversal, exposed
credentials, and privilege escalation. Actively mitigate and correct any
findings prior to release.

**Example**: Running as non-root user or with SELinux enforcing mode enabled has
allowed protection against several vulnerabilities detected in container
runtimes and Kubernetes.

## 8. Security limitations of a system are explainable

**Rationale**: In spite of the best intentions of a system designer, some
security controls can not be applied to a system without fundamentally changing
the nature of the system. In those scenarios, these limitations should be
documented and discoverable, with clear, easy-to-understand reasons behind these
tradeoffs and alternative options listed.

**How**: As part of the design review and code reviews, annotate areas where a
secure option negatively alters the behavior of the software. Document this
decision to exclude the secure option within the code and design documents and
copy this information into a more end-user friendly ‘Design considerations’
guide.

**Example**: Container runtimes, do not provide hypervisor isolation since
containers are not Virtual Machines. In those situations, possible alternatives
like kata containers that provide hardware virtualization while allowing to
manage workloads like a container are documented.

**Note**: Please keep examples limited to open source projects, that are related
to cloud native ecosystem

## Notes

* Message sent to CNCF TAG
  Security: [https://lists.cncf.io/g/cncf-tag-security/message/71](https://lists.cncf.io/g/cncf-tag-security/message/71)
* This guideline format and intent is influenced
  from: [PEP 8 -- Style Guide for Python Code](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/)
* Featured in CNCF
  blog: [https://www.cncf.io/blog/2021/10/12/cloud-native-security-microsurvey-more-than-80-of-organizations-want-to-build-modern-security-systems-with-open-source-software/](https://www.cncf.io/blog/2021/10/12/cloud-native-security-microsurvey-more-than-80-of-organizations-want-to-build-modern-security-systems-with-open-source-software/)
* Github issue
  tracker: [https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/issues/734](https://github.com/cncf/tag-security/issues/734)
